Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Timothy Weingart. He's associate
professor of history at Colorado Mesa University. He's the
author of several bestselling, uh, books, and today we're
going to talk about the mosquito, a Human History
of our deadliest predators. So, Doctor Weingar, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, my pleasure as well. Thank you for having
me.
So, I mean, you're a historian, so what motivated
you to write a book about the mosquito? I
mean, in what ways does the mosquito relate to
our history as humans?
So the mosquito is actually my 5th book. Um,
I had written 4 previous books that were fairly
academic in nature, um, revolving around the First World
War and indigenous peoples globally. And I always chat
with my dad. He's an emergency physician back home
in Canada. But after I finished a book, I
always chat with him about, you know, ideas. And
I wanted to write something that I call an
airport book, which is you, in the airport bookstores,
you only see very select books on the shelf,
whether it be Guns, Germs and Steel, uh, Novo
or Sapiens. So I wanted to write a book
like that, and being a, a medical physician, he
said, you should write a book on malaria. And
I jokingly said, sure, Dad, I'll just write a
book on the mosquito. And he actually was like,
that's a great idea. So I started, I started
researching and realized that there was a A large
gap in the historiography of just human civilization in
general about the historical impact of mosquito-borne pathogens. Um,
OBVIOUSLY, for your listeners, a mosquito, mosquito untethered from
a pathogen is harmless. The only females bite, they
still would need the blood of humans in the
zoological Noah's Ark of other. Animals to grow and
mature their eggs, but they're still harmless. We'd get
a little itchy bump, and donate some blood and
move on. It's the pathogens that hitch a free
ride or are vectored via, uh, select mosquito species
that cause so much death, disease, and suffering and
have really altered and changed the, the course of,
of human history. Um. You know, from the dinosaurs
to present day.
So I mean in terms of our predators, is
it true that the mosquito has been the main
cause of our death, I mean in terms of
diseases transmitted by them and comparing to other animals
that have been causes of human death
for sure, and Unfortunately, like a lot of things
on the internet or TV, um, our movies and,
and nightmares have lied to us. Um, FOR sharks
and wolves and all these, you know, Cujo and
all these feared animals are, are way down the
list. Uh, MOSQUITOES take the number 1 spot as
the largest killer of humanity, um, by far, with
humans being a distant second. So for example, sharks
kill on average maybe 10 people a year. Um,
THE hippos are about 500, but when we think
of mosquito-borne pathogens prior to modern medicine, we're in
the tens or hundreds of millions of people annually.
Um, CURRENTLY, it's somewhere between, numbers vary, but around,
you know, 1.5 to 2 million people still die
of mosquito-borne pathogens every year. Um, SO, throughout our
historical journey from our hominid ancestors to present, the,
the mosquito, or I guess more correctly again, the
pathogens that the mosquito transmits. Uh, HAVE been the,
um, the scourge of humanity.
Yeah, so I mean instead of us having movies,
uh, horror movies, uh, about spiders and snakes, maybe
a more realistic horror movie would be about mosquitoes,
right? Yeah,
although there's that terrible new Anaconda movie coming out,
so I, I, I can't change Hollywood, but yes,
um, you know, our history books have largely You
know, misled us and certainly Hollywood and our nightmares
are um fictitious as far as, you know, animal
killers, if you will. Uh, THE mosquito is, is
by far the, the largest throughout our history.
So you've already told us a little bit about
the mosquito, but what is a mosquito actually and
when and how has the mosquito evolved?
So obviously it's an insect and the mosquito in
its present form has largely, largely existed since the
You know, late Jurassic period, so 190 million years
ago. Um, AND they were vectoring or transmitting pathogens
to the dinosaurs, including various, um, bacteria, viruses, and,
um, worms, uh, as well. And we find this
in coprolite and, and dinosaur dung and, and so
we know this and It's not to say that
the meteor impact 65 million years ago didn't wipe
out the dinosaurs. It certainly did, but a lot
of dinosaur species prior to that were either extinct
or endangered via insect-borne pathogens, and that includes pathogens
vectored by the mosquitoes, sandfly, and other insects. So,
The mosquito was shaping, I guess, human history long
before we or our ancestors, um, were on the
planet, and it actually allowed, when we see the
extinction of the dinosaurs 65.5 million years ago, what
comes around is the age of mammals and insects
actually. Insects and mammals both thrive in coming out
of this kind of nuclear winter, and then we
give birth to our, our hominid ancestors and, and
eventually Homo sapiens, so. Um, THE, the mosquito was
shaping, I guess, our world before we even. So
we're an evolutionary, uh, line or thought on this
planet.
But I mean, how exactly uh do mosquitoes transmit
diseases to humans? I mean they bite us, they
get a little bit of blood from us, is
it then that if they carry these pathogens, they
get into our bloodstream, is that it?
Yep, so again, only females bite, uh, they're simply
being good mothers, they need blood to grow and
mature their eggs. Uh, BOTH males and females, um,
drink nectar, so they actually are pollinators as well.
Mosquitoes are not to the extent of bees, but
they do pollinate. But again, it's only the females
that bite. Um, SO, essentially think
of it
as having 6 needles. Um, SO the 1st 2
go in and they saw into your skin, and
then the 2 others essentially act as, as retractors
holding open the puncture site. One straw, uh straw,
if you will, goes in and it pumps in
saliva with an anticoagulant, uh, and a numbing analgesic,
so that you don't feel the mosquito bite. And
then the 6th 1, if you will, uh, is
the straw that sucks out the blood. So there's
no blood, actual blood exchange during the mosquito bite.
It's in that saliva tube that contains the anticoagulant
and the analgesic. Um, THAT is where the pathogen
enters the human or again. All animals on the
planet suffer from mosquito-borne pathogens. So that's where the
pathogen enters the bloodstream of the animal, in this
case, humans, and that could be, uh, dengue, yellow
fever, malaria, West Nile, Japanese encephalitis, eastern, I can
go on and on, hundreds of mosquito-borne pathogens, um,
for humans, uh, um, and every animal, other animals
have their own as well. So, that's how she
bites, and then. She flies away and pumps the
water out of the, the blood in her abdomen
to, uh, as she's biting, she's pumping the water
out of the blood so she can pack her
abdomen with more protein, uh, which is essentially what
she's after to, to be a good mother.
Mhm. So you've already mentioned there that throughout human
history, probably uh 10s or hundreds of millions, millions
of people have died uh due to diseases transmitted
by mosquito bites, but I mean, do we have
an exact number or is this more of an
approximate number?
No, it's an they're all estimates, and some estimates
are as high as 50% of all humanity in
the history of our species has died of a
mosquito-borne pathogen. Now, this estimate was done by a
man named Barack Blomberg, who is a polymath Nobel
Prize winner in genetics, mathematics, and medicine. And so
this was his estimate in the 80s in using
various, I guess, models of that, you know, upwards
of half of all human beings have um perished
from mosquito-borne pathogens in our existence. Um, EVEN if
that is, I guess. A high estimate, um, it
doesn't take away from the fact that when we
look at the historical record and we look at
the events through our human history that were influenced
or shaped or largely decided by mosquito-borne pathogens, um,
you can't take away the impact that this animal
has had on the trajectory of human history. And
if we remove them, there's not many things in
a singular focus you can say this about where
if we remove the mosquito from. I guess our
historical journey, the, the modern world order would look
completely different. It would, we would might as well
live on a planet in a galaxy far, far
away. And there's very few things you can say
in a, in a, with a singular, I guess.
SINGULAR influence because most historical events are a web
of different cascading influences and, um, and, and, um,
you know, agendas, but I can safely say that
about the mosquito. I can say that about the
horse. I can say that about a very few
things in, in the mosquito being one.
Mhm. So where exactly do mosquitoes exist and tend
to develop because we tend to associate them, er,
I mean mosquito-borne diseases with Africa mostly, but now,
With climate change and global warming, people are worried
that mosquitoes might migrate to other places and take
their diseases with them. So where exactly do they
tend to thrive?
Uh, WELL, they exist everywhere, all over the planet,
uh, which is why they have such a big
impact is because there's really not a person in
the history of the world who hasn't had a
run-in with a mosquito of, of some kind, whether
it's trying to sleep and buzzing in your ear,
whether it's unfortunate. MAY be contracting one of these
pathogens. Um, THEY exist everywhere save for a handful
of, you know, Pacific islands and Iceland. Although I
just read an article recently that they think there
may be mosquitoes in Iceland now, but Iceland has
been mosquito-free, um, and Antarctica as well. But other
than that, the, the planet is crawling with, with
mosquitoes, and I mean, Some of the largest mosquito
populations in the world are in Arctic Canada. So
depending on the mosquito species, and there was malaria
outbreaks and Archangel at the port in northern Russia.
So again, it depends on the various, there's about
33,700 species of mosquitoes on the planet, and only
a couple 100 are capable of vectoring pathogens, and
most don't do it very well at all. So,
There's a handful of mosquitoes, the Anopheles mosquito, which
is the malaria vector, and Aedes aegypti mosquito, which
is an enemy number one for yellow fever, dengue,
West Nile, Zika, these, these, the viral class of
mosquito-borne pathogens. Um, AND that mosquito is an African
mosquito. Mosquito. It, um, it was a stowaway on
slave ships crossing the middle passages of the Atlantic
during, um, European intrusion into the Americas, and it
found a sanguine home in the, the South, Central
South America, the Caribbean, and now that the Aedes
aegypti mosquito is being found as far north as
southern Canada in the Great Lakes region where I
come from. So again, if you have the right
mosquito species and you introduce that pathogen, which you're
gonna have a cyclical um contagion of that pathogen,
I mean, we're even seeing domestic cases of malaria
in Florida now, um, recently, as well as dengue
and, and, and chikungunya and other um viral mosquito-borne
pathogens. Malaria is in its own class. It's a
very sophisticated protozoan. Um, Plasmodium parasite, it's not a
virus, it's not a bacteria, it's not a worm,
it's a very sophisticated evolutionary parasite, um, whereas most
of them are viruses, and then, Uh, filariasis, often
mistakenly called in, in common parlance encephalitis, or sorry,
um, elephantiasis, which is the engorgement of the, the
limbs and the genitals, that's caused by a, a
mosquito-borne pathogen, a worm that blocks the lymph nodes,
and then fluid collects usually in your legs, feet,
and, and, in a male in the scrotum or
genitals. Um, EVEN canine heartworm, for example, uh, we
all give our dogs these pills to prevent, that's
a mosquito-borne pathogen. So they're, they're, they're quite prevalent,
um, and they exist all over the world. In
fact, if there's, you know, 8.5 billion people on
the planet right now, um, almost 6 billion are
at risk of dengue currently. Uh, IT'S the fastest
growing mosquito-borne pathogen in the world. It's called breakbone
fever, it's nickname, and while the death rates are
not extremely high, um, I think I've talked to
people who've had it, they wish they may. It
may go that way with, with the symptoms are
pretty horrific. So, um, they are concerned with global
warming as, as you mentioned with your question is
that mosquitoes who have largely been confined to the
tropics, if you will, are pushing the northern limit
line into the northern hemisphere and also into higher
altitudes. So it's kind of a 3D model of
expansion uh of these what were essentially tropical mosquitoes
showing up in southern Canada or into Europe now.
So when people worry about the possibility or they
or eventually some of these mosquitoes moving to places
where they didn't tend to exist in, um, I
mean, we're talking about certain species of mosquitoes that
tend to transmit these diseases and perhaps conditions that
favor the development of the pathogens they transmit. Is
that it?
Right, so again, Of the 37, roughly 3700 species
of mosquito on the planet, very few, uh, are
capable of transmitting these pathogens, and most of them
don't do it very well at all. There's a
few 100 but there's really nobody. When we talk
about the eradication of mosquitoes or using CRISPR gene
editing technology or other, you know, modern science, nobody
is promoting the eradication of every mosquito off the
face of the earth. That's just simply not true.
Uh, ONE, that would be impossible, and two, we're
targeting very select mosquito species. So the Anopheline mosquitoes
for malaria and primarily Aedes aegypti for, for the
virus class, um, of those pathogens. So. Mosquitoes are
very important to ecosystems. Uh, I'm a big Star
Wars fan, so there's a balance to the force,
and, and when you, you create a disturbance to
the force, you have unintended consequences like the rise
of the Sith. So, no one wants to see
that happen. So, again, nobody is promoting the eradication
of all mosquitoes off the face of the earth.
It's targeting very select mosquito species that are these,
these transmitters or vectors for, for these pathogens.
If we eradicate those mosquito species that are responsible
or uh behave as as vectors for diseases, could
that have a negative impact, uh, in the, on
the biosphere or particular habitats or environments or not
at all?
For sure. And, and again, as I mentioned, mosquitoes
are, are, they drink pollen, so they're, they're pollinators.
Females bite, they need blood for a different reason.
But, so for example, if we removed a certain
mosquito species, then certain species of orchids would go
extinct. Because there, it's, it's the, that symbiotic relationship
between the pollen of these orchids and then, and
then the mosquito transferring this and breeding these orchids.
So, there, there's a symbiotic relationship that goes on
in, in ecosystems and when you disturb that balance,
there's unintended consequences. The other thing we worry about
is, obviously the job of pathogens or, or any
animal or species on this planet is, is procreation
and survival. And, you know, there's no preordained roadmap
or lonely planet for evolution. But when you put
survival pressures on an animal, whether that be a
bacteria even, or I know viruses are technically not
alive, but or a virus, they'll find ways to
mutate to ensure their survival. So, if we extincted
hypothetically, the Aedes aegypti, would the pat mutate to
find another host to transfer it to ensure its
survival. Would another mosquito species simply fill that void
within the, you know, the evolutionary struggle and survival
pressures. So if we put artificial survival pressures on
either these mosquito species or these pathogens, will they
find another route through natural selection to, to continue
the reproduction? And when we look at malaria, Across
our existence, or mosquitoes. I mean, people have hated
mosquitoes since the dawn of humankind. The answer is
yes, they will circumvent our frontline weapons to continue
their survival and the unintended consequences of, of, of
killing us and other animals.
Mhm. Um, DO we know if there are people
who are more vulnerable to mosquitoes and their transmissible
diseases than others? I mean, because, uh, uh, this,
I, I guess that this is probably, uh, medical
misinformation, but I've heard or it's very common for
people to say that, uh, for example, uh, couples
who live together and one of the. One of
the people, uh, one of them gets mosquito bites
and the other doesn't. People say, oh, it's because
they have different blood types and mosquitoes prefer certain
blood types to waters. I mean, is that true
at all?
That is actually true. So, OK, again, when we
look at the disease burden, 90% of malarial deaths
are children under the age of 5. Because their
immune systems are not fully developed, so they just
can't fight this off. So if we look at
the disease burden, it largely falls with young children,
specifically with malaria and pregnant women as well, um,
which is kind of a double whammy. So, but
your question is, do some people get more bitten.
By mosquitoes more than others. The answer is yes.
So 85% of what makes you alluring or less
alluring to mosquitoes is hardwired into your genetic circuit
board, and there's nothing you can do about it,
unless you CRISPR yourself with gene editing technology, which
uh I don't advise, but, um, so. People with
blood type O get bitten twice as much than
people with blood type A and blood type B
somewhere in the middle. So blood type O is
her vintage of choice. Um, IT depends on how
much lactic acid or bacteria is in and on
your skin. So there's a lot of just natural
genetic factors that attract mosquitoes or your, how your
heat signature. So that essentially if you, if you
think of an infrared like the military, like infrared
hunting. They hunt by both sight, which is infrared,
their heat signatures and smell of carbon dioxide, so
CO2. So if you emit more CO2, then they'll
be more attracted to you, or if you're hotter,
they'll be more attracted to you. So pregnant women,
for example, their body temperatures are slightly elevated, so
they stand out to these mosquitoes that are looking
for a meal. So, there is some truth to
that, but I think some of the common things
like Uh, if you have darker skin, you get
bit less by mosquitoes. That's not true. Skin color
or, or skin tone has nothing to do with
it. It's what's in and on your skin, bacterial
lactic acid that matters, or CO2 emissions. Uh, THEY
prefer blondes and redheads over people with darker hair.
Again, no gentlemen prefer blondes like Marilyn Monroe, perhaps,
uh, to quote that movie, but mosquitoes. DON'T care.
Uh, GARLIC, no, they're not vampires, so you don't,
garlic isn't gonna work for you. So there's all
this garbage, of course, out there, and a lot
of the mosquito repellents that are sold commercially also
don't work. Um, SO, yes, there is scientific truth
to, they do prefer certain people over other people.
And I'll give you a great example as I'm
blood type B. And I, I get the odd
mosquito bite, but my sister's blood type O. And
for every 5 mosquito bites I'd get, she'd probably
get 50. So, uh, I, I mean, and, and
there's just a good example of, of circumstantial evidence
if you will, backing up what science already knows.
So, uh, you mentioned the thing there that I
found very interesting. So in terms of even metabolism,
perhaps people who have just for some reason a
higher basal temperature would also be targeted more by
mosquitoes than people who have a lower.
Correct. So that's one, again, it's a combination of
factors. It's not, but that is certainly one of
the factors is body temperature. So again, pregnant women
slightly raised, uh, if you're drinking alcohol, that slightly
raises your body temperature as well. So people who
drink tend to get bitten more than people who
are not drinking. Again, that's, there's a multitude of
factors, but Again, yes, they kind of combine into
this overall picture of your genetic makeup that makes
you alluring or, or less alluring, unfortunately for some
people. Um, AND I mean science does back up
all these, these, I guess genetic claims and, and
the other ones are just. Fictitious in urban legends.
Um, I mean, obviously, a lot of these diseases,
whether it's malaria or yellow fever, their, their birthplace
and origin is in Africa. And, and so to
say like foolishly that people with darker skin don't
get bitten as much, that, that's just, it just
doesn't make any sense.
So I, I want to ask you about the
different historic periods and societies and the empires that
you go through in the book, but just before
that, uh, one more general question. So do we
have or do we know how much of an
economic impact the mosquito has had throughout history and
still has today?
Um, THERE'S no, I mean, in more recent times
we can kind of put numbers on it, but
when we look historically at the difference in economies
between the southern hemisphere and the northern hemisphere, we
see again, there's a lot of factors that go
into this, and I wouldn't be so historically reckless
to say, well, it's just the malarial burden in
the southern hemisphere that caused them to be poor
countries in the north richer. Um, THERE'S a lot
of factors, obviously, mineral resources and settlement patterns and
everything else. However, one of the factors historically in
the progression of global economies is that in the
north, you did have malaria, but it was very
seasonal and it came as an epidemic, and it
was short-lived. Whereas in In the southern hemisphere, you
have endemic malaria. It's constantly there. So think of
your workforce being constantly having to, in modern terms,
calling in sick. Well, if you own a Campbell's
Soup factory and half of your workforce is continuously
calling in sick and can't show up for work,
how can your economy function? So one of the
reasons again in a kind of cascading events, but
certainly one of the reasons why we see the
northern hemisphere in lead productivity compared to the southern
hemisphere in relative terms, one of the factors is
certainly the malarial burden that is just crushing. Um,
THE southern hemisphere, and continues to do so, um,
and malaria being the big one, but obviously others,
and I said, dengue has a, it, the, the
death rates are less, but again, you're extremely sick
for 2 to 3 weeks, uh, and not able
to work if you contract dengue. So, it, it's
one of the factors that shaped, um, global economies
throughout our, our history, uh, in, in recent times
as well.
Yeah, uh, of course it's not, uh, uh, just
a single factor that plays a role in how
much, uh, uh, the economy of a particular country
develops. Of course, we also have certainly to take
into account, uh, political, geopolitical, and other kinds of
geographic. FACTORS, but the mosquitoes certainly is one of
them, or at least makes a difference
for sure, as I, as I mentioned earlier and
as you just correctly said, most, most things are,
um, I say most, not all, most things are
a combination of. Numerous factors including settlement patterns, politics,
uh, resources. I mean, I mean, if you have
resources, you're going to be a wealthy country, whether
that be timber, whether that be water, fish, gold,
uranium, I mean, oil. I mean, look at some
of these northern countries like Russia or Canada, or
they, they have every, the United States, they have
all these massive amounts of resources and massive amounts
of territory as well. These are huge countries. Um,
SO, of course, that's part of it, but if
you're just for lack of a better example, if
you're trying to extract that gold out of the
ground in Canada, you don't have to worry about
malaria, generally speaking. Whereas if you're trying to do
it in parts of Africa, your workforce is constantly
being depleted with malaria and or other mosquito-borne pathogens.
So, that's where we see it kind of draining
the vitality. Of the workforce, whether you because they're
constantly sick. The same can be said of armies
as well, which we'll get to, um, northern armies
kind of coming into malarial zones, um. With the
British during the American Revolution, for example, so it,
it, it just, it just it's a constant endemic
drain on manpower, vitality, and, and at the end
of the day, economies or money.
Mhm. So let's go through history a little bit
here then. How did the mosquito impact ancient Greece?
So we see again looking malaria specifically and yellow
fever, which are the two biggest killers. They, they're
very, the symptoms are very telltale. So when I
go back or we go back and look at
some primary sources coming out of ancient Greece or
certainly Rome, um, we can see the telltale signs
of malarial fevers and then later in history, yellow
fever called vomitto negro in Spanish, which means the
black vomit. Its symptoms are unmistakable, so. Uh, AND
the progression of fevers with malarial fevers. Now there's
5 human malarias. Um, Falsaarum is the most deadly,
and vivax is the most common, but, um, so
we see in ancient Greece specifically, if we look
at Alexander in India, I mean, we talk about
this great kind of coup with his soldiers saying,
I'm not in this mutiny. It's a half truth.
By the time Alexander defeats King Porus in India.
Um, HE marches through India during the monsoon or
the rainy season, and his troops have been continuously
fighting, and on top of that, they are contracting
malaria. The Indus River Valley system has been a
hotbed of malaria forever. So, his troops are sick,
they're tired, and Alexander also knows that his enemies
are increasingly more powerful, and the Nanda Empire, his
next kind of target. He's, I'm not sure if
I wanna win this one, and it's an egomaniac,
he listens to his generals who are saying, hey,
your troops are tired, they don't wanna fight anymore,
they wanna go home. And he also knows he
can't win. And he has a perfect battle record,
so he blames it on his troops and said,
my troops are lazy and they don't wanna fight.
So there's some mythology about this great mutiny, when
in fact, He, it's an untenable situation for him
in this rainy season in the Indus River Valley.
He, his troops are being crushed by malaria. He
knows this, so he turns around, heads to Babylon
to plan a bunch of other campaigns where he
ultimately dies. What we think predominantly we think is
malaria. His body has gone missing, but if we
look at the symptoms, there's a lot of different
um Explanations or hypotheses of how Alexander died, but
the, the number one candidate is malaria.
Mhm. How about the Roman Empire? I mean, did
mosquitoes play a role in the expansion, rise and
fall of the Roman Empire in any way?
Yeah, so in both the rise and fall in
a way, so surrounding the city of Rome is
something called the Pontine Marshes. It's 310 square miles
of marshland. So malaria literally means bad air in
Italian. Um, AND during ancient times it was called
the Roman fever, uh, malaria, because Italy was awash
with malarious, mosquitoes and malaria. So, when we look
at the rise of Rome, Rome was essentially safeguarded
by these pontine marshes which spread from Rome south
towards Naples and Anzio, where the Nazis reintroduced malarious
mosquitoes in 1943, 194944 as a purpose. BIOLOGICAL weapon
against the Allied landings at ANZO and my wife's
grandpa actually contracted malaria from one of these malarious
mosquitoes that were purposefully reintroduced to the marshes by
the Nazis as a deliberate act of biological weaponry.
Um, THE, the thing is though, is the Germans
also got malaria because the mosquito doesn't pick, doesn't
choose sizes. It's like I'll bite the Canadians and
Americans and, and British, but I'll also Bite the
Germans. So it kind of, I don't see it
backfired, but everybody shared equally in the, in the
biological.
The mosquitoes are probably not racist, right?
No, they don't care whether you're a German soldier
or an American or Canadian, British soldier. They, they
did everybody. So, um, but these mosquitoes were purposely
reintroduced into these marshes as a deliberate act of
biological weaponry in 19. Um, 43, 44 at Anzio
to, to where the Allies eventually landed in Italy.
Um, SO these marshes essentially safeguarded Rome and allowed
the city of Rome to develop into, into kind
of this, this huge city, upwards of a million
people at one point in, in, in within the
Roman Empire. And when we see people, outsiders coming
down to attack Rome itself, when we look at
the city of Rome, it's never really taken and
held by anybody. We think of Hannibal and the
Carthaginians. He, he bombs around Italy for 1516 years
and never attacks Rome because he's not prepared to
lay siege in the Pontine Marshes to attack the
city of Rome. Um, HE gets malaria, actually, his
wife and son die of malaria. So when we
look at the Carthaginians, the Huns, Attila and his
Huns, the Vandals, the Visigo. Continuously either they try
to take Rome and suffer horrible malaria rates, and
then retreat, or they stay for a brief period
of time like the Vandals. They ransack, they vandalize
Rome, and then they leave once the malarial burden
starts crushing their, their outside armies coming in. And
so it safeguards Rome, um, from these outside invaders
and allows Rome to kind of flourish and eventually
start to expand, um, with the center, obviously the
city of Rome. Uh, BUT at the same time,
what it does is, again, back to our earlier
discussion, it starts to bleed the vitality of, of
Italy, again, because you have this constant malarial burden,
um, that is depleting, you know, the workforce or
manpower for your mines, for your specifically your agriculture
as well. So it's kind of a, a double-edged
sword for, for Rome in, in, in the long
run.
Yeah, no, it's interesting because uh people or some
people of course talk a lot about the factors
that might have played a role in the fall
of the Roman Empire or or at least the
Western Roman Empire, and perhaps here again it would
be uh a collection of factors and not just.
A single one because people try to arrive at
one single factor like I don't know, political corruption
or economic inequality or invasions by other peoples and
so on and so forth, but probably it was
just a conjunction of factors including, as you mentioned
there, uh mosquito-borne diseases.
Again, yeah, mosquito in, in most of the instances
that, I mean, there's select instances in history where
it is solely malaria, when we look at it,
it's just malaria or the mosquito is the singular
cause of an event, but in the case of
Rome, it's one, there's, I mean, Kyle Harper, who,
who is, uh, his books are, uh, research is
fantastic. The fate of Rome, um, is, is, is,
it's a wonderful book. He's a professor, I can't
remember where, somewhere in the southern US, but he's
written extensively about the Roman Empire and looking at
it from an ecological standpoint. So when we look
at Yeah, malaria is one factor. You had famine,
you have climate change, you have natural disasters, you
have earthquakes and and um like tsunamis, if you
will. You have a, uh, there's a series of
factors, but largely when we look at Malthusian checks,
they don't come as a singular entity. You get
all of them, famine, drought, disease, war, and so,
and you had political. INTRIGUE and political infighting within
the system of Rome itself. And, and so there's
a series of factors and usually when we look
at empires, they start to decay and rot on
the inside. And in this case, it's true of
Rome where you had political intrigue, infighting, civil unrest,
political unrest, natural disasters, famine, disease burden. And then
once it starts to weaken itself, specifically the Western
Roman Empire, as you mentioned, you have outside agents
coming in and ransacking or attacking Rome, and that's,
that's the Germanic tribes that from the steppe that
come, and that's the Visigoths, the Huns, and the
Vandals predominantly, and then eventually the Ostrogoths set up
shop in in Italy, but Yes, so it's a,
it's a combination or series of factors, but certainly
the malarial burden that is, I guess, depressing Rome's
ability to raise soldiers to farm on top of
natural disaster, climate change, and famine. It's this, this
perfect storm of, of, um, I guess things that
are outside of, of Rome's control, except for perhaps
the, the civil strife and political intrigue. Um, AND,
and then they're, pardon the pun, but ripe for
invasion from, from outside forces coming in, and this
is what we see with the Western Roman Empire,
uh, and eventually the eastern Roman Empire too with
the plague of Justinian, and then the collapse of,
of, of his trying to rebuild the Roman Empire.
It's the first epidemic or pandemic of bubonic plague,
which just crushes Constantinople, um, in the, in the
500s during the reign of Emperor Justinian, who was
Had done a good job trying to piece together
the empire, so we see similar things, I guess
later on in the in the east, just with
the plague and not mosquito-borne pathogen.
Yes, so in the book you also talk about
the Crusades, and I actually never thought of the
role that mosquito-borne diseases might have played there, so
tell us about that.
So again, to, to set up malaria, and I
don't suggest this as an inoculation strategy, but with
malaria, essentially, the more you suffer, the less you
suffer. So, the British called it seasoning. You're being
seasoned because there was malaria throughout British as well
in the Finlands, kind of in East England. Um,
SO, the repeat infections of malaria, the less likely
you will die, and the milder the symptoms. So
essentially, the more you suffer, the less you suffer.
Now, it's not like a virus where if you
contract yellow fever and survive, you're immune to yellow
fever. It, it's not a virus, so there's no
vaccine right now. They're developing them, but for malaria.
It's not like the smallpox vaccine where you got
this and then we eradicate smallpox. Um, SO, What
happens is in places like the Upper Euphrates where
you have these endemic malarial zones, and they're all
over the world at this time, including the Finlands
in England, um, including the southern colonies in the
United States. So with the Crusades, one of these
malarial zones is kind of the northern Levant as
the Euphrates River river, um, comes up, so. Um,
What happens is specifically during the Second Crusade is
you have Europeans coming down into these malarial zones
that are not seasoned to malaria. So while local
people still got malaria, they weren't affected as much.
And we see this time and time again, whether
it's Cornwallis's army at at Yorktown during the American
Revolution, cause they came from northern England away from
the malarial zones. They're shoved into the Carolinas during
the revolution, which is awash with malaria, and it's
this different. Difference of seasoning between the American troops
and the British troops, and so the British troops
are just crushed by malaria. So it's that large,
it's that what we see during the Crusades as
well as these European armies coming from malaria-free zones
into malarial zones and getting sapped by malaria where
the local peoples are seasoned to their own malaria.
And and we see this in different episodes, uh,
historically up throughout the kind of ch chronological journey
of, of how the mosquito influenced humanity.
Yeah, uh, let us talk also a little bit
about the Mongol Empire, and of course the Mongol
Empire at its largest was just huge. It, it
went from Eastern Asia up to all the way
to Eastern Europe. So I mean it was a
huge swath of land. Uh, I mean, probably the
only empires that were bigger than the Mongol Empire
in history were the
just one.
Oh, it was just one, what the English
Empire, the British Empire, or the
British Empire. Oh, I thought that the Spanish Empire
was also bigger.
No, I have a, a chart actually that I
a video I show him one of my classes.
Uh, THE Mongol Empire is the largest contiguous land
empire in the world because it was contiguous across
the Eurasian Steppe, um. But it's the 2nd biggest
empire in the world, uh, at least from the,
the knowledge that I have, but I mean, maybe
it's 3rd to the Spanish, but I have it
ranked 2nd to the, the British Empire. Obviously it's
not contiguous, but it's the largest empire in history.
So, uh, so of course it was so huge.
Was it also affected by mosquitoes in some way?
In a few ways. So again, the Mongols come
from the, the, the steppe, the grasslands of Mongolia,
which is not um awash with a mosquito-borne pathogens.
So, we always wondered why when They first attack
Europe and they're into Eastern Europe. They're into the
Hungarian plains and the Balkans and even into parts
of Austria. Why they just quickly vacate Europe and
turn around and come back from where they came,
uh, go back from where they came. So one
of the reasons is actually the crux of the
Mongol Empire or army is obviously its horses and
its bows. So they're proficient with their, their, their
bow, which is made differently than European bow. It
has more pounds per pressure. It can shoot further.
Uh, NOBODY can withstand the Mongol, I guess, mounted
cavalry with their bows. So the, the crux of
their military prowess is their horses and their bows.
So, when they get to the, the, the, the
Eurasian Steppe goes from the Pacific in Mongolia, China,
all the way to Hungary. That's the, the, the
western portion of the Eurasian Steppe, which is the
longest contiguous grasslands in the world. So, during that
time period in the 1200s when the Mongols attacked
Europe, there is abnormally heavy rainfall during those couple
years in those springs and summers. So the Hungarian
plains turn into a morass. They're flooded, so two
things happen. One is it takes away the pasture
lands for their horses, cause it's the only large
pasture lands that are now underwater. Two, you get
malarious mosquitoes breeding in these what are now swamps,
and infecting the Mongol army. And 3 is that
because it's so humid, the glue on their, their
bows won't coagulate and their bow strings become taut,
so they lose their two most valuable kind of
military arms is their bows and their horses. So,
Malaria plays a one, again, one factor. Their leader
also dies, and also Europe isn't as rich as,
as parts of the Middle East where they eventually
head down and join the Crusades. So there's multiple
factors again, but one of the factors is this,
this climate change and the flooding of the, and
we can, there's tree rings that, you know, back
this up and all the, the, the scientific evidence,
but These wet wet conditions rob them of the
Hungarian plain grasslands, where at the same time it
turns them into, you know, mosquito breeding grounds, and
malaria starts to sap the Mongols as well. Um,
SO that's one, and the other one is Kublai
Khan, when he tries to invade what is now
Southeast Asia, and the Khmhmer civilization is usually when
you attack, you attack during the dry season, and
if you can't take or hold it, you vacate
during the rainy season. He keeps his army in
Southeast Asia during the rainy season. And they get
absolutely crushed by malaria, which is why the Mongols
are never able to really take or fortify um
Southeast Asia and in their later kind of imperial
push with Kublai Khan in both Japan and then
into Southeast Asia as well.
So and during European colonization of the Americas and
Africa, uh we've already talked about the presence of
mosquitoes in both places, but, and we know of
course that Europeans took some of their pathogens to
the. Americans and it was one of the biggest
factors in in how many people died there because
the indigenous peoples there were not exposed to those
pathogens before the arrival of Europeans, but did the
mosquitoes also play a role during colonization?
Yes, so again, the Aedes aegypti is brought to
the Americas uh on slave ships as a as
a stowaway. And then finds a sanguine home and.
South America, Central America, and then eventually the southern
colonies of the United States. Um, AND then those
pathogens that, that she spreads are introduced, specifically yellow,
yellow fever is the big one in the tropics
of the Americas. It's a huge killer yellow fever.
And there's Anopheles mosquitoes in both the Africa or
or the old world, if you will, and there's
Anopheles mosquitoes in the Americas. But when Pangaea separates,
they've essentially had 100 million years of different evolution.
So there is no malaria in the Americas until
Columbus comes over and some of the soldiers and
sailors have malaria, and these American Anopheles mosquitoes who
have never seen malaria, bite the Spanish, and then
they quickly start transmitting malaria in the Americas. So
that's how these pathogens and mosquitoes get to the
Americas or they're already here, pathogen-free and the pathogen
malaria is introduced to the Anopheles mosquitoes in the
Americas. And yeah, indigenous people, upwards of 95 million
indigenous people die of European disease. That's about 95%.
There's arguably 100 million indigenous peoples across the Western
Hemisphere when, when Columbus is 8000 miles lost and
arrives to the Americas. And it's, uh, I mean,
it, they, it, disease including malaria and yellow fever
just devastate indigenous people. 95% are dead within the
next kind of 200 years of, of disease because
They, they're not, haven't been exposed to European diseases.
Smallpox is the biggest killer, um, but even things
like whooping cough or, you know, pertussis, like there's
so many, and it's largely because of differentiation of
economies between Europe and what happens in the Americas
and Farming and not domesticating animals because most of
our diseases come, they're spillover, they're zoonotic diseases, they're
spillovers from other animals. So by not domesticating animals
on a large scale in the Americas, they don't
have these diseases where Europeans domesticate these animals anywhere
from 8. Well, across the Eurasian Steppe, 8000 to
6000 BCE when we look at goats, sheep, chickens,
cattle, pigs, and horses are a little bit later,
3500 BCE. So, They, these spillover diseases come to
the Europeans, but they're, but they're still dying, but
not, not to that extent. They're, they have some
immunity to them by that time, whereas indigenous peoples,
it's a, it's pretty horrific. Piece of, of poisonous
history if you will,
yeah, yeah, for sure, so uh we've already talked
a little bit about or touched on the British
Empire, so uh were mosquitoes also a factor in
the creation of Great Britain?
Yeah, so why European countries want colonies is something
called mercantilism. Essentially they rape the raw resources from
these colonies, they ship it back to the mother
country in Europe, they turn it into usable goods,
and then sell these usable usable goods back to
their, their colonists at an inflated price. And so
all European mother countries, if you will, Spain, Portugal,
Britain, uh, France, and the Netherlands to a lesser
extent have these mercantilist economies and, and, and essentially
it benefits, it's all designed to benefit the mother
country. The colonists are just used as essentially a,
uh, an export market. So, the more colonies you
have, the more raw resources you have, and the
more export markets you have for these resources being
turned into. To usable goods sold and taxed at
a higher price and then the mother country benefits.
It's one of the causes of the American Revolution,
uh, the Cuban Revolution, uh, you know, the, the
Haitian Revolution with Toussaint Louverture. I mean, it's one
of the causes of all these revolutions with Simon
Bolivar in South America and, and the rest of
it is Mexico included. They want to break free
of these mercantilist economies and have capitalism so they
can sell their stuff to anybody. So, What happens
is Scotland is not included in the English mercantilist
economy, so Scotland can't benefit from England's Empire. And
so Scotland wants to create its own empire, rightfully
so, cause there's a lot of money in this.
So, the Spanish had tried to punch a essentially
a highway or a path through the what is
now the Panama Canal, the Isthmus of Darien, the
Panama, because this is obviously a huge, would be
a huge boon to trade. Uh, AND they suffer
horribly from, from yellow fever. And so the Scottish
think that they can do this. It's called the
Darien Expedition or the Darien colony, and they pump,
they're already in debt, but they pump all available
capital into this colonial expedition in Panama to try
to create essentially a, a, a Panama highway, you
know, through the isthmus for trade. And so they
pump all this money in there, and it's absolutely
crushed by yellow fever and mosquito-borne pathogens, and they
send more settlers, and they're devastated, and so they
keep pumping their money into this, and it fails
miserably. Uh, AND so they're in massive debt. And
so the English tell the Scottish, if you surrender
your sovereignty to us in the Acts of Union,
so we're talking the, the, the colonial expedition was
the late 1600s, early 1700s. And so, England tells
Scotland that they'll pay back all their debts or
forgive all their debt. If they surrender their sovereignty
and join England, creating Greater Britain, if you will.
And Scotland agrees with the Acts of Union, and
Robbie Burns, the poet has problems with this, and
writes about this, and the Acts of Union are
signed, and Scotland, this is the orig origin of
the creation of Greater Britain, and it is due
to mosquitoes in the wilds of Panama. Um, SO,
again, it, it, it's a. Unbelievable story when you
connect the dots between this colonial failed colonial expedition
and then the outcome is, I mean, we're living
it still today with, with, with Scotland, and I
mean, I know they have some political independence now,
but that's very recent. So, um, there's, I guess
one example of hundreds of the impact of, of
mosquito-borne pathogens in shaping and creating or at least
altering the trajectory of, of human history or geopolitics.
Did the mosquito also play a role in the
American Civil War?
So indirectly, yes, because again, if we look at
the malarial burden in the US, um, not yellow
fever in the Civil War, it was, it was
because the blockades, the Anaconda Plan or the blockade
of the South by the US Navy largely kept
the US free of these yellow fever epidemics that
would come up from the Caribbean. Uh, SO it
was the endemic malaria that's already in the South
and along the Mississippi River watershed and the southern
colonies. So, It prolongs the war essentially, um, because
when we look at the Peninsula Campaign by General
McClellan, uh, he himself gets malaria and delays the
advance of Union soldiers towards Richmond, which gives the
Confederates and General Lee, who's now in command by
that time, even more time. To reinforce their defenses
around the hills of Richmond, because when McClellan, he
gets malaria actually at Yorktown, back to where the
British are crushed by malaria during the revolution. And
so it, it Creates a bit of a snafu
during the peninsula Campaign. He tries to attack Richmond.
He's defeated and pushed back. The Confederates counterattack and
essentially drive the Union back out. And so, the
Union war planners, even before the war, are fearful
of what they call the Memphis line. So anything
south of this Memphis line, they, they're very fearful
of sending their troops because of malaria. So, in,
in that way, it helps prolong the Civil War
because it's not short in part because of these
malarial zones in what are these Confederate states along
the Mississippi River watershed and then um in the
Carolinas and even Virginia. So, it prolongs the war
and allows Lincoln to fire. The the original war
aim was to preserve the economic integrity of the
Union. But as the war drags on, partly because
of malaria, he adds another war aim, which is
obviously the abolition of slavery. So, and then eventually
malaria comes back and bites the Confederates because it
starts to again bleed the vitality of not only
their army, but their workforce and their civilians, uh,
as well. So, it's kind of a, a, a
two-pronged influence on the Civil War. Um, AND the
death rates from malaria aren't huge, but again, even
if you're not dying, you're still sick and you
can't do your job. And I always say that
a wounded soldier is worse than a dead soldier,
and I don't mean that to be, um, immoral
or, uh, you know. Do not have a heart,
but if you're a wounded soldier, you're still taking
up resources. Whereas if you're dead, you're not taking
up resources. So the think of malaria like that,
where if you're not dead, you're, you're sick for
months, and you're still taking up resources, and you
can't fight, you can't farm, um, you can't sail
your ship up the Mississippi to deliver supplies to
Vicksburg. I mean, whatever it is. So, it starts
just like Rome, it starts to bleed, slowly bleed
the Confederacy as the Anaconda plan is just choking
any supply lines into the Confederacy.
So, uh, let me ask you about one more
historic event and then I have just one final
question. Earlier, you've already told us a little bit
about, uh, the sort of role that intentionally and
also unintentionally and unintentionally the mosquito played in World
War II, but uh tell us more about that.
I mean, in, in which ways were mosquitoes a
factor there?
So, in the European um theater, we have high
malaria rates in North Africa, uh, Sicily, obviously in
Italy, uh, but in the Pacific theater, and I'll,
I'll kind of paraphrase to quote General MacArthur, who's
in, in command of the, the US forces in
the Pacific, is, this is gonna be a very
long war if for every division I have fighting,
I have another division on leave and another division
in the hospital suffering from malaria. And so he
tells essentially the general staff um of the US
military and, and the, the politicians that be at
that time in, in the, the War Department that
we need to have a solution to malaria because
it's again depleting um. The vitality of my army
and it's depleting the punching power. So the US
creates something called the Malaria Project, which is given
equal scope of secrecy to the Manhattan Project to
developing nuclear weapons. Um, AND so what comes out
of this is DDT, um, and chloroquine, uh, and
certain malarial prophylactics, if you will. And I mean,
Walt Disney's involved in this with, with. Uh, MOVIES
for the troops, the wing and, um, wing and
enemy movies for the troops about malaria. Doctor Zeuss
is writing pamphlets, uh, cause he was part of
the War Department before he was Doctor Seuss about
the ills of malaria, and the, this is Anne,
she's dying to meet you. It's a very risque
kind of sexual, um, little pamphlet that's given to
soldiers. So there's a huge campaign, this anti-malarial campaign,
whether it's propaganda to The troops, whether it's safety
instructions to the troops done through Disney movies or
Doctor Seuss pamphlets. Um, BUT what comes out of
this is DDT, which is a miraculous mosquito killer,
despite the fact that it enters the food chain
and, and kills a lot of other things including
us. Uh, IT does rid the world. It, it's
the reason we don't have malaria in Canada anymore
or in the US anymore is DDT. It is
a, it's a, it does what it's intended to
do. It it also has huge ramifications on other
animals and including us with cancers, but. So I'm
not promoting the use of DDT, but so, it,
uh, and so we're spraying um areas of operation.
By 1943, we're spraying areas of operation. The Allies
are in the Pacific and in Europe with with
DDT and other mosquito repellents, if you will, um,
to try to limit the burden of malaria on
our soldiers. And then, as I said, um, the
Nazis, um, Mussolini drains the pontine marshes to reclaim
that land for farmland, and it's actually one of
the remarkable things that he does, whether trains run
on time or not, I don't care, but he
drains the pontine marshes and he force relocates peasants
to these, I guess, purposefully um erected cities in
these pontine in what was the Pontine Marshes, and
malaria rates drop by about 90%. And so the,
the Germans re-flood the Pontine marshes and then add
the mosquitoes specifically as a biological weapon during the
Anzio landings in
43. So, uh, one last question then, and we've
already ended up touching on it a little bit
earlier, but, uh, and particularly also when I mentioned
that now with increasing global warming, probably mosquitoes are
going to become more of a factor, more of
a problem in more, uh, societies and countries across
the globe. But what is the impact of the
mosquito in contemporary society?
Uh, uh, uh, THE mosquito is still the biggest
killer of, of humans of any animal, um, including
ourselves. Um, I mean, the rates are less than
they were in the past, really in the last
50 years, we see the rates decreasing because we're
getting. A slight grip on malaria, but we're seeing
the rates of dengue go up, which doesn't have
the lethality of malaria, but again, you're still seeing
a lot of, uh, I mean, a lot of
the attraction of dengue. It's the fastest growing mosquito-borne
pathogen on the planet. And as I mentioned earlier,
somewhere between 5, 5.5 billion people are currently at
risk of dengue, um, in the world. So. With
global warming, and again, we're seeing mosquitoes that hitherto
weren't in these places and now are. And so
what's happening is northern wealthy countries are now having
or going to start to have to pay attention
to mosquitoes. Whereas before we looked, the wealthy countries
of Europe and Canada and the United States, we
looked at malaria and yellow fever as a problem
in lesser developed countries or poorer countries where it's
out of sight, out of mind. It's their problem,
not ours. Uh, AND so, funding for research and
development for malaria vaccines or dengue vaccines or whatever
else is, is put on the shelf because there's
no purchasing power to buy these medications, where it's
like, oh, I'd rather put my money in to
develop something for cancer or for AIDS, where I
can make money back off what I'm producing in
my R&D. So we see stagnation in any R&D
to find solutions to malaria or yellow fever because
it didn't exist in wealthy countries. That's starting to
change with, with global warming and the proliferation of
these mosquitoes in hitherto untapped northern climes. So, we
are going to start seeing wealthy countries, I guess,
be forced to pay attention. To mosquito-borne pathogens. And
as I mentioned, we have domestic cases of malaria
now in Florida. We have domestic cases of dengue
and chikungunya in the United States, um, and on
top of West Nile. So, What we are seeing
in the last kind of 20 years is, I
guess, some movement or a shift into developing or
trying to develop vaccines or um medical shields to
these diseases, which is a good thing.
Mhm. Great, so the book is again The Mosquito
A Human History of Our Deadliest Predator. I'm of
course leaving a link to it in the description,
um, and Doctor Weingar, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Uh, I am not on the internet. I have
no social media, uh, I never have, and I
never will, and shockingly I've survived just fine, uh,
so I, I, I mean, I, I come from
a very small town in Canada and I, I
like my privacy. I love my job at the
university. I love coaching my hockey team. I love
my family, but I, I like to, to, pardon
the pun, I like to fly under the radar
just like the mosquito. Uh, AND, uh, so I
have no social media. Um, OBVIOUSLY, I've done tons
of interviews that are all over the internet and,
and, but, uh, I, I, I like, I like
my privacy.
No, that's completely fair. So thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a fascinating conversation.
You're very welcome. Thank you for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Danaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.